[Doc] Add architecture document (#2869)
opensearch-project/security: ARCHITECTURE.md

# OpenSearch Security Plugin Architecture

> OpenSearch’s core systems do not include security features, these features are added by installing the Security Plugin.  The Security Plugin accesses OpenSearch’s internals to build up Authentication, Authorization, End to End Encryption, Audit Logging, and management interfaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenSearch’s core systems do not include security features, these features are added by installing the Security Plugin.  The Security Plugin accesses OpenSearch’s internals to build up authentication, authorization, end-to-end encryption, audit logging and management interfaces.

```

Reviewer 2: I would also suggest swapping the second sentence to "The Security Plugin extends OpenSearch to provide..."

## Components

> The Security Plugin is packaged into a standard plugin zip file used by OpenSearch which can be installed by using the plugin tool.  The security configuration is accessible on disk for modification before the node has been turned on, afterward the admin tools or api endpoints need to be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Security Plugin is packaged into a standard plugin zip file used by OpenSearch which can be installed by using the plugin tool. The security configuration is accessible on disk for modification before the node has been turned on, afterward the admin tools or API endpoints need to be used.

```

> The Security Plugin is packaged into a standard plugin zip file used by OpenSearch which can be installed by using the plugin tool.  The security configuration is accessible on disk for modification before the node has been turned on, afterward the admin tools or api endpoints need to be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Security Plugin is packaged into a standard plugin zip file used by OpenSearch which can be installed by using the plugin tool. The security configuration is accessible on disk for modification before the node has been turned on. After launch, the admin tools or API endpoints can be used for dynamic changes.
```

```mermaid
graph TD
    subgraph OpenSearch Node
        subgraph File System
            cfg[Security Configuration files]
            adm[Admin Tools]
        end
        subgraph Indices
            idx(Index 1..n)
            secIdx[Security Index]
        end
        subgraph Plugins
           pgns(Plugins 1..n)
           sec[Security Plugin]
        end

        sec -- bootstrap security config --> cfg
        sec -- refresh security config from cluster --> secIdx
        adm -- backup/restore security config --> sec
    end
```

### Security Plugin

> The runtime of the security plugin uses extension points to insert itself into the path actions.  Several security managemenet actions are registered in OpenSearch so they can be changed through REST API actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The runtime of the Security Plugin uses extension points to insert itself into the path actions. Several security management actions are registered in OpenSearch so they can be changed through REST API actions.

```

### Security Configuration

> The security configuration is stored in an system index that is replicated to all nodes. When a change has been made to the configuration, the Security Plugin is reloaded to cleanly initialize its components with the new settings.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The security configuration is stored in a system index. When a change has been made to the index, the Security Plugin reloads the configuration from the index and updates the caches on each node.
```

> The security configuration is stored in an system index that is replicated to all nodes.  When a change has been made the Security plugin is reloaded to cleanly initialize its components with the new configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The security configuration is stored in an system index that is replicated to all nodes. When a change has been made the Security plugin is reloaded to cleanly initialize its components with the new configuration.

```

> The security configuration is stored in an system index that is replicated to all nodes.  When a change has been made the Security plugin is reloaded to cleanly initialize its components with the new configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The security configuration is stored in an system index that is replicated to all nodes. When a change has been made the Security Plugin is reloaded to cleanly initialize its components with the new configuration.

```

> The security configuration is stored in an system index that is replicated to all nodes.  When a change has been made the Security plugin is reloaded to cleanly initialize its components with the new configuration.

Reviewer 3: Is it replicated to all nodes? The cache is on all nodes, but I believe the security index itself may not have a replica on all of the nodes of a cluster.

Author: I pieced this explanation from how AbstractApiAction.saveAndUpdateConfigs / TransportConfigUpdateAction work.  Do you have changes you'd like to make, happy to look at a PR.

> The security configuration is stored in an system index that is replicated to all nodes.  When a change has been made the Security plugin is reloaded to cleanly initialize its components with the new configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The security configuration is stored in an system index that is replicated to all nodes. When a change has been made to the configuration, the Security Plugin is reloaded to cleanly initialize its components with the new settings.

```

#### Configuration Files

> When starting up with no security index detected in the cluster the security plugin will attempt to load configuration files from disk into a new security index, these can be manually modifed or sourced from a backup of a security index from the admin tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When starting up with no security index detected in the cluster the Security Plugin will attempt to load configuration files from disk into a new security index, these can be manually modified or sourced from a backup of a security index from the admin tools.

```

### Admin Tools

> For OpenSearch nodes to join a cluster they need to have the same security configuration.  During this joining period configuration values need to be consistant for SSL settings as well as certificate files need to be available on the node before it joins the cluster.  The admin tools ecapsulate these and other features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For OpenSearch nodes to join a cluster they need to have the same security configuration. During this joining period, configuration values need to be consistent for SSL settings as well as certificate files need to be available on the node before it joins the cluster. The admin tools encapsulate these and other features.

```

## Flows

### Authentication / Authorization

> The Security plugin supports multiple authentication backends, there is an internal identity provider that works with http basic auth as well as support external providers including OpenId Connect (OIDC) and SAML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Security Plugin supports multiple authentication backends, there is an internal identity provider that works with HTTP basic auth as well as support external providers including OpenId Connect (OIDC) and SAML.

```

> The Security plugin supports multiple authentication backends, there is an internal identity provider that works with http basic auth as well as support external providers including OpenId Connect (OIDC) and SAML.

Reviewer 3: Why not have an enumerated list here, potentially with links to the documentation website?

Author: Good callout, I'll link out to the documentation website

> The Security plugin supports multiple authentication backends, there is an internal identity provider that works with http basic auth as well as support external providers including OpenId Connect (OIDC) and SAML.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Security Plugin supports multiple authentication backends including an internal identity provider which works with HTTP basic authentication as well as external providers such as OpenId Connect (OIDC) and SAML.

```

> Authorization is governed by roles declared in the security configuration, roles control access to resource by the action name and/or index names in combination with OpenSearch action names.  These actions names are from the transport action name in OpenSearch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Authorization is governed by roles declared in the security configuration, roles control access to resource by the action name and/or index names in combination with OpenSearch action names. These actions names are from the transport action name in OpenSearch.

```

> Authorization is governed by roles declared in the security configuration, roles control access to resource by the action name and/or index names in combination with OpenSearch action names.  These actions names are from the transport action name in OpenSearch.

Reviewer 3: This is typically the case that transport action names are what is put in a role definition, but recently with the restapi: addition to the security plugin and rest layer authz it would also include named routes.

Author: A separate section around special permissions could be useful to capture details like this; I plan to keep the high level architecture simple.

> Users are connected to roles through roles mapping including getting backend roles from the authentication provider and mapping them to the roles configured in the Security Plugin.

Reviewer 3: Wdyt about going into the 4 types of role mapping?

1. Direct user mapping
2. Backend role mapping
3. Host mapping
4. And_Backend_Role mapping - user must have all backend roles in the list

Author: A separate section around different types of role mappings could be useful to capture details like this; I plan to keep the high level architecture simple.

> Users are connected to roles through roles mapping including getting backend roles from the authentication provider and mapping them to the roles configured in the Security Plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users are assigned roles via the role mappings. These mappings include backend role assignments from authentication providers as well as internal roles defined in the Security Plugin.

```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    title Basic Authorization flow
    autonumber
    participant C as Client
    participant O as OpenSearch
    participant SP as Security Plugin
    participant RH as Request Handler
    participant AL as Audit Log

    C->>O: Request
    O->>SP: Request Received
    activate SP
    SP->>SP: Authenticate user via internal/external auth providers
    SP->>SP: Resolve Authorization for user

>     SP-->>O: Allow/Deny request

Reviewer 3: This is not quite reflective of how authz works in the security plugin. A Request Handler can issue as many transport actions as it would like and each of those transport actions will be authorized to verify that the user can perform the action. This diagram presents a conceptual picture of how it works, but there is a bit more nuance when zooming in. For REST-Layer authz this is the conceptual model, but its not the case for transport action authorization.

    SP->>AL: Update Audit Log asynchronously
    deactivate SP
    O->>RH: Request continues to request handler
    RH-->>O: Result
    O->>C: Response
```

#### Multiple Authorization Provider flow

> Based on the order within the Security Plugins configuration authentication providers are iterated through to discover which provider can authenticate the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on the order within the Security Plugin's configuration authentication providers are iterated through to discover which provider can authenticate the user.

```

> Based on the order within the Security Plugins configuration authentication providers are iterated through to discover which provider can authenticate the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Based on the order within the Security Plugin's configuration, authentication providers are iterated through to discover which provider can authenticate the user.

```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    title Multiple Authorization Provider flow
    autonumber
    participant C as Client
    participant SP as Security Plugin
    participant IAP as Internal Auth Provider
    participant EAP as External Auth Provider*
    participant SC as Security Configuration

    C->>SP: Incoming request

>     SP->>IAP: Attempt to authenticate internally

Reviewer 3: Internal auth provider is like any other provider and can be put at the bottom of the list. It may not necessarily always be first.

Author: While the ordering configurable, the illustration of this graph isn't meant to be for its flexibility but to provide the distinction between AuthN sources and then show how AuthZ information is retrieved.

Additionally having the internal auth provider go last is a poor configuration, for every authentication attempt there is latency cost to check the user identity on the external IDP before checking the internal auth provider.

    IAP-->>SP: Internal user result
    loop for each External Auth Provider
        SP->>EAP: Attempt to authenticate
        EAP-->>SP: External user result
    end
    SP->>SC: Check Authorization rules
    SC->>SC: Match user roles & permissions
    SC-->>SP: Authorization result
    SP-->>C: Response
```

#### Rest vs Transport flow

> OpenSearch treats external REST request differently than internal transport requests.  Transport requests are more structured and are used to communicate between nodes.  These transport requests are where the security plugin focused authorization through its SecurityIntercepton to perform inspections such as which indexes are involved in a given request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenSearch treats external REST request differently than internal transport requests. Transport requests are more structured and are used to communicate between nodes. These transport requests are where the Security Plugin focused authorization through its SecurityIntercepton to perform inspections such as which indexes are involved in a given request.

```

> OpenSearch treats external REST request differently than internal transport requests.  Transport requests are more structured and are used to communicate between nodes.  These transport requests are where the security plugin focused authorization through its SecurityIntercepton to perform inspections such as which indexes are involved in a given request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenSearch treats external REST request differently than internal transport requests.  Transport requests are more structured and are used to communicate between nodes.  These transport requests are where the Security Plugin focused authorization through its SecurityIntercepton to perform inspections such as which indexes are involved in a given request.

```

> OpenSearch treats external REST request differently than internal transport requests.  Transport requests are more structured and are used to communicate between nodes.  These transport requests are where the security plugin focused authorization through its SecurityIntercepton to perform inspections such as which indexes are involved in a given request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OpenSearch treats external REST requests differently than internal transport requests. While REST requests allow for client-to-node communication and make use of API routes, transport requests are more structured and are used to communicate between nodes.
```
removed the last line as DC is adding authz in REST layer.
